Directories


We mentioned earlier, that directory has different default permissions than files. Directories must have execute flag to allow users to go into them.

First, let's go up one directory.

cd .. && ls -l

The permissions for directory are set to drwxr-xr-x, what means that owner can do everything, but group and other cannot write anything in the directory.

As you remember (I hope), everything in Linux is a file, so we work with directory's permissions in the same way, as we did in previous chapter with files. We simply use the same chmod command.

Let us play a little with it!

chmod o-r student3 && ls -ld student3/

Right, this czanges something for other users, but not us. Let's remove read flag for everyone.

chmod a-r student3 && ls -ld

Can we see what is in the directory?

ls -l student3

ls: cannot open directory 'student3': Permission denied

No, we can't.

What about jumping there? Shouldn't be possible, right?

cd student3

Well, it is possible...

ls -l

But we can't read anything.

Why?

It is simple, really. We removed read flag, so we cannot read the list of content inside the directory. But...

cd .. && cat student3/student3

works!

So with read permissions you can read the content list inside the directory.

Ok, let's bring back the default setting.

chmod 755 student3 && ls -ld student3

Now we will remove execute flag.

chmod u-x student3 && ls -ld student3

ls -l student3

And we have this

ls: cannot access 'student3/student3': Permission denied
total 0
-????????? ? ? ? ?            ? student3
Oh, my... What had happen here?

Without execute flag we can read the list od elements inside directory, but we lost actual work ability. To prove it, we can run

cat student3/student3

And we see

cat: student3/student3: Permission denied

cd is also impossible to be executed.

cd student3/

-bash: cd: student3/: Permission denied

Understanding what is possible and what is not is very important. I found very useful matrix actions and permissions for directories done by David and I recreated it here for more handy information.

directory permissions	digit	delete, rename, create files	directory list	read file content	write file content	cd to directory	cd subdirectory	subdirectory list	access subdirectory files
---	0								
--x	1			x	x	x	x	x	x
-w-	2								
-wx	3	x		x	x	x	x	x	x
r--	4		filenames only						
r-x	5		x	x	x	x	x	x	x
rw-	6		filenames only						
rwx	7	x	x	x	x	x	x	x	x
