First look on the ps command


As almost everything in Linux, ps is an abbreviation of Process status.

The simplest execution is just without any argument

ps

This way we cannot see much. This way we can see these processes, which are related to this specific session only. This means, that we see the session itself (bash in our case), and processes executed at this exact moment by this session (ps in our case) Anyway, we can go through fields now.

PID - quite obvious, this is the process id.
TTY - Terminal associated with the process. Here is a very detailed reading about TTY.
TIME - total time of CPU usage
CMD - the command which is running.
Well, not much, right?

I will say more... These are not all processes associated with this terminal (this, where the ps was executed).

Before wy try more, there is one explanation needed. With ps we can use arguments, quite obvious. But there is a trick. Normally, we use arguments with dash, like ls -l. But ps is different. It accepts argument with and without dash. Try these (and maybe even... try to find the answer what is there:) ):

ps a

ps -a

They are different, correct?

Try ps T

Now we have all processes which has any connection with the current terminal. And also, we see different formatting. Let's ignore that CMD become COMMAND, time changed its granularity. We have new column, STAT. It means state of the process and it is very importnt to understand.

Statuses
This list is copied from manual, which I believe are most important to understand.

D - uninterruptible sleep (usually IO)
I - Idle kernel thread
R - running or runnable (on run queue)
S - interruptible sleep (waiting for an event to complete)
T - stopped by job control signal
t - stopped by debugger during the tracing
X - dead (should never be seen)
Z - defunct ("zombie") process, terminated but not reaped by its parent
Some statuses may have the second letter. Let's list the most important

< - high-priority (not nice to other users)
N - low-priority (nice to other users)
s - is a session leader
l - is multi-threaded
+ - is in the foreground process group
List all processes
To list all processes, use

ps -A

It doesn't give much information, but at least you have all processes listed.