configuration of /etc/sudoers file


Sudo can be configured. In order to do so, we use /etc/sudoers file. Let's see it.

clear
cat /etc/sudoers

We are interested in two lines there. At least, for now.

root ALL=(ALL:ALL) ALL

This is the configuration line for the user

%sudo ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD:ALL

And this one for the group. The character which indicates group is %.

Probably you noticed, that we have two entries for group sudo. The last one is used.

Check if sudo is configured for users
Let's check student1 is sudo is configured for him.

su - student1
sudo ps

Provide password (1student )

No, we cannot use sudo.

exit

Let's configure it, then!

Edit sudoers file
We can do it simply, by using your editor of choice, like vim:

vim /etc/sudoers.

However, Linux givees us special tool which allows us to safely edit sudoers file. It is visudo.

But first, let's configure visudo to use vim.

update-alternatives --config editor

And select vim.basic (which should be listed with number 3 on the list).

Ok, we ready.

visudo

So, visudo knows which file to edit and which editor to use.

Ok, let's quit for now: :q!

Config line explained
Each config line looks like this:

user pos1=(pos2:pos3) pos4

or

%group pos1=(pos2:pos3) pos4

On the beginning we have user or group. To differentiate these two, we use % for specify the group.
pos1 - applies to all hosts
pos2 - user can use all commands as all users (i.e. root can ls as user03, etc)
pos3 - user can use commads as all groups
pos4 - user can use all commads

Let's add some configuration for student1.

Please open

visudo

and go to the end of the file and add the line (press i to change vim mode to INSERT, if needed):

student1 ALL=(ALL:ALL) ALL

Quit visudo by pressing ESC key followed by :wq

Login to `student1 again.

su - student1
sudo ps

provide password (which is 1student)

exit

Now it works, but with password.

please remember, when you use su you have to provide the password of the user you want to use. With sudo you have to provide the password of current user.

sudo without password
Ok, let's edit sudoers again with

visudo

and add this line:

student2 ALL=(ALL:ALL) NOPASSWD:ALL

It is easily noticeable, that we configured our second user with one difference - NOPASSWD. in this way we informed sudo, that this user doesn't need to confirm himself with password. Let's see it.

su - student2
sudo ps
exit