4. Sorting the files


Sorting
Obviously, all lists can be sorted. There is no exception here.

Linux allows us to list files using multiple sorting options. ls command has some options built-in. First type of sort we already observed. By default ls sorts the files alphabetically. Let's try something else.

Before we start, though, there is one concept we need to go through. Linux has differente timestamps, three, to be exact.

atime - the last time when file was accessed
mtime - last modification time. By modification we mean change in the file content.
ctime - last metadata modification time. We mean here - permissions change, location of the file, etc.
It is imperative for you to understand it.

What is timestamp?

This is the numerical representation of the time. It is the number of seconds passed from Unix epoch which is midnight of 1st of January, 1970.

Example how it looks is visible below

$ date +%s
1635797690
$ date
Mon 01 Nov 2021 08:14:52 PM UTC
Well, on the occasion we learned a new command - date. Enough to say, this command shows the current date and time:

date .

The first sort option will be -t. This argument sorts files with the last modification time, newest files come first.

Let's try.

ls -lt

We use two arguments, to observe things better. We can specify exactly the modification time by adding u to the argument list. But please remember, in order to print this information properly you have to use t with another argument (u in this case).

ls -ltu

Ok, now let's print the list and order it by ctime - metadata change.

ls -ltc

Well, not much changed, right? Please execute these commands and carefully observe the output

touch theNewestFile (this creates a new file)
ls -ltu
ls -ltc
echo "hello world!" > file-02 (this will add something to the file)
ls -ltu
ls -ltc
chmod 444 file-01 (this will change the permissions of the file)
ls -ltu
ls -ltc

Please spend some time to understand what and how was printed. We used some commands which are new, but do not waste your time on them now.